docs/tutorials/SSH_tutorial.md, before:

## Public keys best practices

### Material

[:fontawesome-solid-file-pdf: Download the presentation](../assets/pdf/hpc_intro.pdf){: .md-button }

Before you start his tutorial, you will need to:

* be on Unibe or UniFR Network  (maybe start [VPN](https://www.unibe.ch/universitaet/campus__und__infrastruktur/rund_um_computer/internetzugang/zugang_auf_interne_ressourcen_mit_vpn/index_ger.html))
* have a "IBU cluster" account (have you received the "Welcome to IBU Cluster" email, looking like this:

> **Welcome to IBU Cluster email**
>
>  Dear John
>
>  we have created an account for you on the IBU computing cluster.
>
>  Login Name: jdoe
>
>  Password will be sent in a separate email.  
>
>  ...

!!! Note
    In this following tutorial, code snippets witht the title **"local"** are on your local computer; snippets with the tile **"remote"** are on the remote server.


### 1. Verify host public key

**Exercise 1A:** check for existing host key

Open the default terminal and make sure you are in your home directory. Then execute:

!!! warning "For windows users"
    If you are on windows use **PowerShell** for these exercises. So not WSL2 or MobaXterm. The reason for this is that it complicates working with VSCode in later exercises otherwise.

=== "Powershell"
    ``` powershell title="local"
    ssh-keygen -F binfservms01.unibe.ch -l -f .\.ssh\known_hosts
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ``` bash title="local"
    ssh-keygen -F binfservms01.unibe.ch -l -f ~/.ssh/known_hosts
    ```

??? done "Result"

    If you have been connecting to this server before, the output looks like this:
    ```
    # Host binfservms01.unibe.ch found: line 1
    binfservms01.unibe.ch ECDSA SHA256:Yz6JYkqIEHYni+EJgEwQIPqlz0IEUBQLHEQVU8nEwSY
    $
    ```

    Otherwise your output will be empty, or if you've never used ssh before it will look like this:
    ```
    do_known_hosts: hostkeys_foreach failed: No such file or directory
    ```

**Exercise 1B:** remove existing host key

Because in this tutorial we will learn to verify host keys, we will first remove stored host keys if there are any.  You can remove host keys with the following command:

=== "Powershell"
    ``` powershell title="local"
    ssh-keygen -R binfservms01.unibe.ch -f .\.ssh\known_hosts
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ``` bash title="local"
    ssh-keygen -R binfservms01.unibe.ch -f ~/.ssh/known_hosts
    ```

??? done "Result"
    ```
    # Host binfservms01.unibe.ch found: line 1
    /home/user/.ssh/known_hosts updated.
    Original contents retained as /home/user/.ssh/known_hosts.old
    $
    ```

    If you have never used `ssh` before you might get an error like this (can be safely ignored):

    ```
    mkstemp: No such file or directory
    ```


**Exercise 1C:** check host key

!!! warning "Warning"
    Replace *<hpcuser\>* with your Login Name on the server.

First, let's try to login to the server with `ssh`:

```
$ ssh <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch
```

??? done "Result"
    ```
    The authenticity of host 'binfservms01.unibe.ch (130.92.199.95)' can't be established.
    ED25519 key fingerprint is SHA256:lvjBlWxYtrwFe509ktewvRFXCX7KfAZiLMlMh2mmbeY.
    Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no/[fingerprint])?
    ```


!!! alert "Note"
    It is always wise to check that the fingerprint is correct. You should have got it from another source of information (eg email, website).

Verify that the fingerprint is correct, then type `yes`. This will result in the following output:

```
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no/[fingerprint])? yes
Warning: Permanently added 'binfservms01.unibe.ch' (ECDSA) to the list of known hosts.
 ___ ____  _   _   _     _                         _           _            
|_ _| __ )| | | | | |   (_)_ __  _   ___  __   ___| |_   _ ___| |_ ___ _ __
 | ||  _ \| | | | | |   | | '_ \| | | \ \/ /  / __| | | | / __| __/ _ \ '__|
 | || |_) | |_| | | |___| | | | | |_| |>  <  | (__| | |_| \__ \ ||  __/ |   
|___|____/ \___/  |_____|_|_| |_|\__,_/_/\_\  \___|_|\__,_|___/\__\___|_|   

<hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch's password:
```

Now you can enter your password. Depending on your type of terminal, you might not be able to see the password being typed. Also, copy-pasting might be different compared to what you are used to (e.g. pasting by right-click in PowerShell).

??? done "Result"
    ```
    <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch's password: ******* *ENTER*
    Last login: Wed Oct 21 16:57:39 2020 from dhcp-100-237.vpn.unibe.ch
    [<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
    ```


**Exercise 1D:** check content of .ssh directory on the server:

We will add the public key to the server at a later stage. Now, check whether you already have a key in the `.ssh` directory at the server:

``` bash title="remote"
ls .ssh
```

??? done "Result"
    If you don't have a pubic key at the server (which will be the case for new users), you'll get a message the `.ssh` directory does not exist (but we will create one):

    ```
    ls: cannot access .ssh: No such file or directory
    [<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
    ```

!!! warning "Warning"
    Logout before moving on to the next exercise.

``` bash title="remote"
exit
```


### 2. Generate user keys pair

**Exercise 2A:** use `ssh-keygen` command to generate a key and encrypt the private key with a passphrase

!!! warning
    Below should be executed on your local computer

Now, we can generate a public and private key on your local computer. Do this with the following command:

``` bash title="local"
ssh-keygen
```

This will prompt to with some questions:

```
Generating public/private rsa key pair.
Enter file in which to save the key (/home/<localuser>/.ssh/id_rsa):
```

Usually, the default directory is where you want to store your keys, so hit *ENTER*.

This is followed by a asking for a passphrase. This passphrase will be used to protect your keys locally. It will prevent anyone to access your keys from your local computer:

```
Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase):
```

After completed this successfully, you will get a message like this:

```
Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase): *********** *ENTER*
Enter same passphrase again: *********** *ENTER*
Your identification has been saved in /home/<localuser>/.ssh/id_rsa
Your public key has been saved in /home/<localuser>/.ssh/id_rsa.pub
The key fingerprint is:
SHA256:erkOXJp0loytm7+cbfk7rs9dDzaEtvP6GCmR9Bt7lvg user@laptop
The key's randomart image is:
+---[RSA 3072]----+
|                 |
|                 |
|          .      |
|       + o o .   |
|      o S o = .  |
|     o O . o O . |
|      B o ..O B .|
|       * +oo.@ +.|
|      ooBoo=O=E .|
+----[SHA256]-----+
$  
```

**Exercise 2B:** look at the generated files

Now, key information has been stored in your local `.ssh` directory. Check it by typing:

``` bash title="local"
ls -l .ssh
```

??? done "Result"

    Which should result in:

    ```
    -rw------- 1 <localuser> <localuser> 2.6K Okt 21 17:01 id_rsa
    -rw-r--r-- 1 <localuser> <localuser>  574 Okt 21 17:01 id_rsa.pub
    -rw-r--r-- 1 <localuser> <localuser>  444 Okt 22 13:56 known_hosts
    $
    ```

Check out the hash of your public key with:
=== "Powershell" 
    ``` powershell title="local"
    cat .\.ssh\id_rsa.pub
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ``` bash title="local"
    cat .ssh/id_rsa.pub
    ```

??? done "Result"
    ```
    ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1yc2EAAAADAQABAAABgQD38aCe4ICZZ6kPrxlAYruBNhguvHv5YQ2OPj
    L5Bvs2lzAtV1JPu+QQV9F5SUE3AJc7jh9yn/Agkrg4pMC9EDObWKTl5lg6ritcGtzQMfXYszEe
    vMNRv8ukV6nCt6WGfyjK4l61nXiuXxTv1RvGzJxAefdUGYMvMkkZOdkMKGKTxwE/xmyXJVYUPc
    EJEqGt4TSD3nC2Wg8GSp1L+MDpI5626UEVVafEzuOIbbHBmQMPhB+0MevP+ZsXzD0Dz1sWWI0w
    GlnU9W9a1gZ+QNiIeWCvKtNuxXFKB98338W3YQqE+dk/YwwSB1jeUHIRTEVSyKaIcr42s2Hg9E
    2TEVZhmZM4vFJb8nozL8Hu3ZKAHqG1JR3FE1mqJ8kOHnWZiGNf3pQwUe3cgN7c5bsZPEl8VJGw
    uDArQSAFik+nmrNgQlcodIHYnzY6DtbOMnZUpWuVO1zfQQkPGBbGfdDuNT2cvxAkM1RkWtnCT5
    JdOSn//4njp6aCfg38SopbDn3tfJcJTM=  <localuser>@laptop
    $
    ```

And your private key with:

=== "Powershell"
    ``` powershell title="local"
    cat .\.ssh\id_rsa
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ``` powershell title="local"
    cat .ssh/id_rsa
    ```

??? done "Result"
    ```
    -----BEGIN OPENSSH PRIVATE KEY-----
    b3BlbnNzaC1rZXktdjEAAAAACmFlczI1Ni1jdHIAAAAGYmNyeXB0AAAAGAAAABAFGhqvzt
    qUP/ybuCOapCXgAAAAEAAAAAEAAAGXAAAAB3NzaC1yc2EAAAADAQABAAABgQD38aCe4ICZ
    Z6kPrxlAYruBNhguvHv5YQ2OPjL5Bvs2lzAtV1JPu+QQV9F5SUE3AJc7jh9yn/Agkrg4pM
    ...
    /mOQjFg57Pn4XdswU+/gX3mbMWbZXJxIdUO1OIlCKolSe2dJA2CfYUv0XpCIWLe36Iiczn
    NqTpG7AzfMNH/Ok9Ojr2pqrQnSI=
    -----END OPENSSH PRIVATE KEY-----
    $
    ```




### 3. Copy Public Key to server

Now that we have generated both the public and private key files, we will need to copy the public key to the server, so it can be used for authentication.

**Exercise 3A:** use ssh-copy-id to copy your public key to the server

Copy the public key by using the following command:

=== "Powershell"
    ``` powershell title="local"
    type $env:USERPROFILE\.ssh\id_rsa.pub | ssh <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch "cat >> .ssh/authorized_keys"
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ``` bash title="local"
    ssh-copy-id <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch
    ```

??? done "Result"
    ```
    /usr/bin/ssh-copy-id: INFO: Source of key(s) to be installed: "/home/<localuser>/.ssh/id_rsa.pub"
    /usr/bin/ssh-copy-id: INFO: attempting to log in with the new key(s), to filter out any that are already installed
    /usr/bin/ssh-copy-id: INFO: 1 key(s) remain to be installed -- if you are prompted now it is to install the new keys
     ___ ____  _   _   _     _                         _           _            
    |_ _| __ )| | | | | |   (_)_ __  _   ___  __   ___| |_   _ ___| |_ ___ _ __
     | ||  _ \| | | | | |   | | '_ \| | | \ \/ /  / __| | | | / __| __/ _ \ '__|
     | || |_) | |_| | | |___| | | | | |_| |>  <  | (__| | |_| \__ \ ||  __/ |   
    |___|____/ \___/  |_____|_|_| |_|\__,_/_/\_\  \___|_|\__,_|___/\__\___|_|   

    <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch's password:
    ```

This requires authentication. Therefore type your password:

=== "Powershell"
    ```
    <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch's password: *********** *ENTER*
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ```
    <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch's password: *********** *ENTER*

    Number of key(s) added: 1

    Now try logging into the machine, with:   "ssh '<hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch'"
    and check to make sure that only the key(s) you wanted were added.
    ```


**Exercise 3B:** login to the server without password

Now you can login on to the server without having to type the password associated with your server login. However, because you protected your keys with a passphrase, you will need to type the passphrase to access your local keys:

``` bash title="local"
ssh <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch
```

??? done "Result"
    ```
      ___ ____  _   _   _     _                         _           _            
    |_ _| __ )| | | | | |   (_)_ __  _   ___  __   ___| |_   _ ___| |_ ___ _ __
     | ||  _ \| | | | | |   | | '_ \| | | \ \/ /  / __| | | | / __| __/ _ \ '__|
     | || |_) | |_| | | |___| | | | | |_| |>  <  | (__| | |_| \__ \ ||  __/ |   
    |___|____/ \___/  |_____|_|_| |_|\__,_/_/\_\  \___|_|\__,_|___/\__\___|_|   

    Enter passphrase for key '/home/<localuser>/.ssh/id_rsa': *********** *ENTER*
    Last login: Wed Oct 21 18:47:46 2020 from dhcp-99-231.vpn.unibe.ch
    [<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
    ```


**Exercise 3B:** check content of .ssh on the server

We copied the public key to the server (with the `ssh-copy-id` command), so it should be on there. It is stored in the `ssh` folder. Check whether it's there with:

``` bash title="remote"
ls -l .ssh
```

Now the folder exists and contains a file with authorized keys:

```
-rw-------. 1 <hpcuser> <hpcuser> 988 Oct 21 18:48 authorized_keys
[<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
```

Check what's in there:

```bash title="remote"
cat .ssh/authorized_keys
```

??? done "Result"

    It's your public key:

    ```
    ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1yc2EAAAADAQABAAABgQD38aCe4ICZZ6kPrxlAYruBNhguvHv5YQ2OPj
    L5Bvs2lzAtV1JPu+QQV9F5SUE3AJc7jh9yn/Agkrg4pMC9EDObWKTl5lg6ritcGtzQMfXYszEe
    vMNRv8ukV6nCt6WGfyjK4l61nXiuXxTv1RvGzJxAefdUGYMvMkkZOdkMKGKTxwE/xmyXJVYUPc
    EJEqGt4TSD3nC2Wg8GSp1L+MDpI5626UEVVafEzuOIbbHBmQMPhB+0MevP+ZsXzD0Dz1sWWI0w
    GlnU9W9a1gZ+QNiIeWCvKtNuxXFKB98338W3YQqE+dk/YwwSB1jeUHIRTEVSyKaIcr42s2Hg9E
    2TEVZhmZM4vFJb8nozL8Hu3ZKAHqG1JR3FE1mqJ8kOHnWZiGNf3pQwUe3cgN7c5bsZPEl8VJGw
    uDArQSAFik+nmrNgQlcodIHYnzY6DtbOMnZUpWuVO1zfQQkPGBbGfdDuNT2cvxAkM1RkWtnCT5
    JdOSn//4njp6aCfg38SopbDn3tfJcJTM= <localuser>@laptop
    [<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
    ```


### 4. SSH-Agent

You probably don't want to re-type your passphrase every time you are connecting to the server. We will use `ssh-agent` to enable you to access your keys without having to type your passphrase every time you want to use them.

!!! note
    This part is platform dependent. Choose here therefore either **PowerShell** or **mac OS/Linux**.

=== "PowerShell"

    Open PowerShell in admin mode (right-click on the PowerShell icon and choose "Run as administrator"). Then type:

    ```
    Get-Service ssh-agent | Set-Service -StartupType Automatic -PassThru | Start-Service
    ```

    To start the ssh-agent without the need to restart your system:

    ```
    start-ssh-agent.cmd
    ```

    You will be prompted for the password of your key. Type it and hit *ENTER*.


=== "mac OS/Linux"

    **Exercise 4A:** start ssh-agent

    Write the output of `ssh-agent` to a file:

    ```
    $ ssh-agent > sshagent.txt
    $ cat sshagent.txt
    ```

    ??? done "Result"
        ```
        SSH_AUTH_SOCK=/tmp/ssh-JGZOTKftGNqM/agent.23764; export SSH_AUTH_SOCK;
        SSH_AGENT_PID=23765; export SSH_AGENT_PID;
        echo Agent pid 23765;
        $
        ```

    **Exercise 4B:** connect to ssh-agent

    Now, you can always connect to `ssh-agent` by typing:

    ```
    $ . sshagent.txt
    ```

    ??? done "Result"
        ```
        Agent pid 23765
        ```

**Exercise 4C:** List identities

We have not added any identities to `ssh-agent` yet:

```
$ ssh-add -l
```

```
The agent has no identities.
$
```


**Exercise 4D:** add a key to ssh-agent

So let's add our private key:

=== "Powershell"
    ``` powershell title="local"
    ssh-add .\.ssh\id_rsa
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ``` bash title="local"
    $ ssh-add .ssh/id_rsa
    ```

This will require your passphrase:

```
Enter passphrase for .ssh/id_rsa: ************* *ENTER*
Identity added: .ssh/id_rsa (<user>@laptop)
$
```

**Exercise 4E:** List identities

Now check whether the identity has been added.

```
$ ssh-add -l
```

Your key hash should appear:

```
3072 SHA256:uw6W41Pg5MMLKwASHK1G3JhRe+UOUQyt4NHNp2grVTo <user>@laptop (RSA)
```

**Exercise 4F:** use ssh-agent

Since `ssh-agent` is running and has your private key added to it, you don't have to re-type your password if you want to acces your keys:

```
$ ssh <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch
```

Will result in:

```
    ___ ____  _   _   _     _                         _           _            
|_ _| __ )| | | | | |   (_)_ __  _   ___  __   ___| |_   _ ___| |_ ___ _ __
    | ||  _ \| | | | | |   | | '_ \| | | \ \/ /  / __| | | | / __| __/ _ \ '__|
    | || |_) | |_| | | |___| | | | | |_| |>  <  | (__| | |_| \__ \ ||  __/ |   
|___|____/ \___/  |_____|_|_| |_|\__,_/_/\_\  \___|_|\__,_|___/\__\___|_|   

Last login: Wed Oct 21 18:47:46 2020 from dhcp-99-231.vpn.unibe.ch
[<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
```

**Exercise 4G:** reuse a running ssh-agent from a new terminal

Open a new terminal, and check which identities are known by `ssh-agent`:

```
$ ssh-add -l
```

=== "Powershell"

    Your key hash should appear:

    ```
    3072 SHA256:uw6W41Pg5MMLKwASHK1G3JhRe+UOUQyt4NHNp2grVTo <user>@laptop (RSA)
    ```

    This means that ssh agent will always run in the background, even if you close your terminal, or restart your comptuer. 

=== "Mac OS/Linux"

    The added identities are gone:

    ```
    Could not open a connection to your authentication agent.
    $
    ```


    However, we have stored the information on the ssh-agent. So we can refer back to it:

    ```
    $ . sshagent.txt
    ```

    ??? done "Result"
        ```
        Agent pid 23765
        ```

**Exercise 4H:** use ssh-agent

Now, that we have access to the `ssh-agent`, we can login without the requirement of a passphrase:

```
$ ssh <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch
```

??? done "Result"
    ```
        ___ ____  _   _   _     _                         _           _            
    |_ _| __ )| | | | | |   (_)_ __  _   ___  __   ___| |_   _ ___| |_ ___ _ __
        | ||  _ \| | | | | |   | | '_ \| | | \ \/ /  / __| | | | / __| __/ _ \ '__|
        | || |_) | |_| | | |___| | | | | |_| |>  <  | (__| | |_| \__ \ ||  __/ |   
    |___|____/ \___/  |_____|_|_| |_|\__,_/_/\_\  \___|_|\__,_|___/\__\___|_|   

    Last login: Wed Oct 21 18:47:46 2020 from dhcp-99-231.vpn.unibe.ch
    [<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
    ```

Commit message:

Update SSH_tutorial.md: add exercise 1E to create .ssh/authorized_keys with proper permissions

docs/tutorials/SSH_tutorial.md, after:

## Public keys best practices

### Material

[:fontawesome-solid-file-pdf: Download the presentation](../assets/pdf/hpc_intro.pdf){: .md-button }

Before you start his tutorial, you will need to:

* be on Unibe or UniFR Network  (maybe start [VPN](https://www.unibe.ch/universitaet/campus__und__infrastruktur/rund_um_computer/internetzugang/zugang_auf_interne_ressourcen_mit_vpn/index_ger.html))
* have a "IBU cluster" account (have you received the "Welcome to IBU Cluster" email, looking like this:

> **Welcome to IBU Cluster email**
>
>  Dear John
>
>  we have created an account for you on the IBU computing cluster.
>
>  Login Name: jdoe
>
>  Password will be sent in a separate email.  
>
>  ...

!!! Note
    In this following tutorial, code snippets witht the title **"local"** are on your local computer; snippets with the tile **"remote"** are on the remote server.


### 1. Verify host public key

**Exercise 1A:** check for existing host key

Open the default terminal and make sure you are in your home directory. Then execute:

!!! warning "For windows users"
    If you are on windows use **PowerShell** for these exercises. So not WSL2 or MobaXterm. The reason for this is that it complicates working with VSCode in later exercises otherwise.

=== "Powershell"
    ``` powershell title="local"
    ssh-keygen -F binfservms01.unibe.ch -l -f .\.ssh\known_hosts
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ``` bash title="local"
    ssh-keygen -F binfservms01.unibe.ch -l -f ~/.ssh/known_hosts
    ```

??? done "Result"

    If you have been connecting to this server before, the output looks like this:
    ```
    # Host binfservms01.unibe.ch found: line 1
    binfservms01.unibe.ch ECDSA SHA256:Yz6JYkqIEHYni+EJgEwQIPqlz0IEUBQLHEQVU8nEwSY
    $
    ```

    Otherwise your output will be empty, or if you've never used ssh before it will look like this:
    ```
    do_known_hosts: hostkeys_foreach failed: No such file or directory
    ```

**Exercise 1B:** remove existing host key

Because in this tutorial we will learn to verify host keys, we will first remove stored host keys if there are any.  You can remove host keys with the following command:

=== "Powershell"
    ``` powershell title="local"
    ssh-keygen -R binfservms01.unibe.ch -f .\.ssh\known_hosts
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ``` bash title="local"
    ssh-keygen -R binfservms01.unibe.ch -f ~/.ssh/known_hosts
    ```

??? done "Result"
    ```
    # Host binfservms01.unibe.ch found: line 1
    /home/user/.ssh/known_hosts updated.
    Original contents retained as /home/user/.ssh/known_hosts.old
    $
    ```

    If you have never used `ssh` before you might get an error like this (can be safely ignored):

    ```
    mkstemp: No such file or directory
    ```


**Exercise 1C:** check host key

!!! warning "Warning"
    Replace *<hpcuser\>* with your Login Name on the server.

First, let's try to login to the server with `ssh`:

```
$ ssh <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch
```

??? done "Result"
    ```
    The authenticity of host 'binfservms01.unibe.ch (130.92.199.95)' can't be established.
    ED25519 key fingerprint is SHA256:lvjBlWxYtrwFe509ktewvRFXCX7KfAZiLMlMh2mmbeY.
    Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no/[fingerprint])?
    ```


!!! alert "Note"
    It is always wise to check that the fingerprint is correct. You should have got it from another source of information (eg email, website).

Verify that the fingerprint is correct, then type `yes`. This will result in the following output:

```
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no/[fingerprint])? yes
Warning: Permanently added 'binfservms01.unibe.ch' (ECDSA) to the list of known hosts.
 ___ ____  _   _   _     _                         _           _            
|_ _| __ )| | | | | |   (_)_ __  _   ___  __   ___| |_   _ ___| |_ ___ _ __
 | ||  _ \| | | | | |   | | '_ \| | | \ \/ /  / __| | | | / __| __/ _ \ '__|
 | || |_) | |_| | | |___| | | | | |_| |>  <  | (__| | |_| \__ \ ||  __/ |   
|___|____/ \___/  |_____|_|_| |_|\__,_/_/\_\  \___|_|\__,_|___/\__\___|_|   

<hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch's password:
```

Now you can enter your password. Depending on your type of terminal, you might not be able to see the password being typed. Also, copy-pasting might be different compared to what you are used to (e.g. pasting by right-click in PowerShell).

??? done "Result"
    ```
    <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch's password: ******* *ENTER*
    Last login: Wed Oct 21 16:57:39 2020 from dhcp-100-237.vpn.unibe.ch
    [<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
    ```


**Exercise 1D:** check content of .ssh directory on the server:

We will add the public key to the server at a later stage. Now, check whether you already have a key in the `.ssh` directory at the server:

``` bash title="remote"
ls .ssh
```

??? done "Result"
    If you don't have a pubic key at the server (which will be the case for new users), you'll get a message the `.ssh` directory does not exist (but we will create one):

    ```
    ls: cannot access .ssh: No such file or directory
    [<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
    ```

**Exercise 1E:** create .ssh directory and authorized_keys file on the server:

We will create the `.ssh` directory and its authorized_keys file at the server and ensure it has proper permissions:

``` bash title="remote"
mkdir .ssh
touch .ssh/authorized_keys
chmod -R go-rwx .ssh
ls -la .ssh
```

??? done "Result"
    the .ssh directory and authorized_keys file have been created with permissions that only allow you to read and write:

    ```
    .ssh:
    total 4
    drwx------. 2 <hpcuser> <hpcuser>   29 29 sep 11:14 .
    drwx------. 8 <hpcuser> <hpcuser> 4096 29 sep 11:14 ..
    -rw-------. 1 <hpcuser> <hpcuser> 0 29 sep 11:16 authorized_keys
    [<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
    ```

!!! warning "Warning"
    Logout before moving on to the next exercise.

``` bash title="remote"
exit
```


### 2. Generate user keys pair

**Exercise 2A:** use `ssh-keygen` command to generate a key and encrypt the private key with a passphrase

!!! warning
    Below should be executed on your local computer

Now, we can generate a public and private key on your local computer. Do this with the following command:

``` bash title="local"
ssh-keygen
```

This will prompt to with some questions:

```
Generating public/private rsa key pair.
Enter file in which to save the key (/home/<localuser>/.ssh/id_rsa):
```

Usually, the default directory is where you want to store your keys, so hit *ENTER*.

This is followed by a asking for a passphrase. This passphrase will be used to protect your keys locally. It will prevent anyone to access your keys from your local computer:

```
Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase):
```

After completed this successfully, you will get a message like this:

```
Enter passphrase (empty for no passphrase): *********** *ENTER*
Enter same passphrase again: *********** *ENTER*
Your identification has been saved in /home/<localuser>/.ssh/id_rsa
Your public key has been saved in /home/<localuser>/.ssh/id_rsa.pub
The key fingerprint is:
SHA256:erkOXJp0loytm7+cbfk7rs9dDzaEtvP6GCmR9Bt7lvg user@laptop
The key's randomart image is:
+---[RSA 3072]----+
|                 |
|                 |
|          .      |
|       + o o .   |
|      o S o = .  |
|     o O . o O . |
|      B o ..O B .|
|       * +oo.@ +.|
|      ooBoo=O=E .|
+----[SHA256]-----+
$  
```

**Exercise 2B:** look at the generated files

Now, key information has been stored in your local `.ssh` directory. Check it by typing:

``` bash title="local"
ls -l .ssh
```

??? done "Result"

    Which should result in:

    ```
    -rw------- 1 <localuser> <localuser> 2.6K Okt 21 17:01 id_rsa
    -rw-r--r-- 1 <localuser> <localuser>  574 Okt 21 17:01 id_rsa.pub
    -rw-r--r-- 1 <localuser> <localuser>  444 Okt 22 13:56 known_hosts
    $
    ```

Check out the hash of your public key with:
=== "Powershell" 
    ``` powershell title="local"
    cat .\.ssh\id_rsa.pub
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ``` bash title="local"
    cat .ssh/id_rsa.pub
    ```

??? done "Result"
    ```
    ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1yc2EAAAADAQABAAABgQD38aCe4ICZZ6kPrxlAYruBNhguvHv5YQ2OPj
    L5Bvs2lzAtV1JPu+QQV9F5SUE3AJc7jh9yn/Agkrg4pMC9EDObWKTl5lg6ritcGtzQMfXYszEe
    vMNRv8ukV6nCt6WGfyjK4l61nXiuXxTv1RvGzJxAefdUGYMvMkkZOdkMKGKTxwE/xmyXJVYUPc
    EJEqGt4TSD3nC2Wg8GSp1L+MDpI5626UEVVafEzuOIbbHBmQMPhB+0MevP+ZsXzD0Dz1sWWI0w
    GlnU9W9a1gZ+QNiIeWCvKtNuxXFKB98338W3YQqE+dk/YwwSB1jeUHIRTEVSyKaIcr42s2Hg9E
    2TEVZhmZM4vFJb8nozL8Hu3ZKAHqG1JR3FE1mqJ8kOHnWZiGNf3pQwUe3cgN7c5bsZPEl8VJGw
    uDArQSAFik+nmrNgQlcodIHYnzY6DtbOMnZUpWuVO1zfQQkPGBbGfdDuNT2cvxAkM1RkWtnCT5
    JdOSn//4njp6aCfg38SopbDn3tfJcJTM=  <localuser>@laptop
    $
    ```

And your private key with:

=== "Powershell"
    ``` powershell title="local"
    cat .\.ssh\id_rsa
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ``` powershell title="local"
    cat .ssh/id_rsa
    ```

??? done "Result"
    ```
    -----BEGIN OPENSSH PRIVATE KEY-----
    b3BlbnNzaC1rZXktdjEAAAAACmFlczI1Ni1jdHIAAAAGYmNyeXB0AAAAGAAAABAFGhqvzt
    qUP/ybuCOapCXgAAAAEAAAAAEAAAGXAAAAB3NzaC1yc2EAAAADAQABAAABgQD38aCe4ICZ
    Z6kPrxlAYruBNhguvHv5YQ2OPjL5Bvs2lzAtV1JPu+QQV9F5SUE3AJc7jh9yn/Agkrg4pM
    ...
    /mOQjFg57Pn4XdswU+/gX3mbMWbZXJxIdUO1OIlCKolSe2dJA2CfYUv0XpCIWLe36Iiczn
    NqTpG7AzfMNH/Ok9Ojr2pqrQnSI=
    -----END OPENSSH PRIVATE KEY-----
    $
    ```




### 3. Copy Public Key to server

Now that we have generated both the public and private key files, we will need to copy the public key to the server, so it can be used for authentication.

**Exercise 3A:** use ssh-copy-id to copy your public key to the server

Copy the public key by using the following command:

=== "Powershell"
    ``` powershell title="local"
    type $env:USERPROFILE\.ssh\id_rsa.pub | ssh <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch "cat >> .ssh/authorized_keys"
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ``` bash title="local"
    ssh-copy-id <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch
    ```

??? done "Result"
    ```
    /usr/bin/ssh-copy-id: INFO: Source of key(s) to be installed: "/home/<localuser>/.ssh/id_rsa.pub"
    /usr/bin/ssh-copy-id: INFO: attempting to log in with the new key(s), to filter out any that are already installed
    /usr/bin/ssh-copy-id: INFO: 1 key(s) remain to be installed -- if you are prompted now it is to install the new keys
     ___ ____  _   _   _     _                         _           _            
    |_ _| __ )| | | | | |   (_)_ __  _   ___  __   ___| |_   _ ___| |_ ___ _ __
     | ||  _ \| | | | | |   | | '_ \| | | \ \/ /  / __| | | | / __| __/ _ \ '__|
     | || |_) | |_| | | |___| | | | | |_| |>  <  | (__| | |_| \__ \ ||  __/ |   
    |___|____/ \___/  |_____|_|_| |_|\__,_/_/\_\  \___|_|\__,_|___/\__\___|_|   

    <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch's password:
    ```

This requires authentication. Therefore type your password:

=== "Powershell"
    ```
    <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch's password: *********** *ENTER*
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ```
    <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch's password: *********** *ENTER*

    Number of key(s) added: 1

    Now try logging into the machine, with:   "ssh '<hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch'"
    and check to make sure that only the key(s) you wanted were added.
    ```


**Exercise 3B:** login to the server without password

Now you can login on to the server without having to type the password associated with your server login. However, because you protected your keys with a passphrase, you will need to type the passphrase to access your local keys:

``` bash title="local"
ssh <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch
```

??? done "Result"
    ```
      ___ ____  _   _   _     _                         _           _            
    |_ _| __ )| | | | | |   (_)_ __  _   ___  __   ___| |_   _ ___| |_ ___ _ __
     | ||  _ \| | | | | |   | | '_ \| | | \ \/ /  / __| | | | / __| __/ _ \ '__|
     | || |_) | |_| | | |___| | | | | |_| |>  <  | (__| | |_| \__ \ ||  __/ |   
    |___|____/ \___/  |_____|_|_| |_|\__,_/_/\_\  \___|_|\__,_|___/\__\___|_|   

    Enter passphrase for key '/home/<localuser>/.ssh/id_rsa': *********** *ENTER*
    Last login: Wed Oct 21 18:47:46 2020 from dhcp-99-231.vpn.unibe.ch
    [<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
    ```


**Exercise 3B:** check content of .ssh on the server

We copied the public key to the server (with the `ssh-copy-id` command), so it should be on there. It is stored in the `ssh` folder. Check whether it's there with:

``` bash title="remote"
ls -l .ssh
```

Now the folder exists and contains a file with authorized keys:

```
-rw-------. 1 <hpcuser> <hpcuser> 988 Oct 21 18:48 authorized_keys
[<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
```

Check what's in there:

```bash title="remote"
cat .ssh/authorized_keys
```

??? done "Result"

    It's your public key:

    ```
    ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1yc2EAAAADAQABAAABgQD38aCe4ICZZ6kPrxlAYruBNhguvHv5YQ2OPj
    L5Bvs2lzAtV1JPu+QQV9F5SUE3AJc7jh9yn/Agkrg4pMC9EDObWKTl5lg6ritcGtzQMfXYszEe
    vMNRv8ukV6nCt6WGfyjK4l61nXiuXxTv1RvGzJxAefdUGYMvMkkZOdkMKGKTxwE/xmyXJVYUPc
    EJEqGt4TSD3nC2Wg8GSp1L+MDpI5626UEVVafEzuOIbbHBmQMPhB+0MevP+ZsXzD0Dz1sWWI0w
    GlnU9W9a1gZ+QNiIeWCvKtNuxXFKB98338W3YQqE+dk/YwwSB1jeUHIRTEVSyKaIcr42s2Hg9E
    2TEVZhmZM4vFJb8nozL8Hu3ZKAHqG1JR3FE1mqJ8kOHnWZiGNf3pQwUe3cgN7c5bsZPEl8VJGw
    uDArQSAFik+nmrNgQlcodIHYnzY6DtbOMnZUpWuVO1zfQQkPGBbGfdDuNT2cvxAkM1RkWtnCT5
    JdOSn//4njp6aCfg38SopbDn3tfJcJTM= <localuser>@laptop
    [<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
    ```


### 4. SSH-Agent

You probably don't want to re-type your passphrase every time you are connecting to the server. We will use `ssh-agent` to enable you to access your keys without having to type your passphrase every time you want to use them.

!!! note
    This part is platform dependent. Choose here therefore either **PowerShell** or **mac OS/Linux**.

=== "PowerShell"

    Open PowerShell in admin mode (right-click on the PowerShell icon and choose "Run as administrator"). Then type:

    ```
    Get-Service ssh-agent | Set-Service -StartupType Automatic -PassThru | Start-Service
    ```

    To start the ssh-agent without the need to restart your system:

    ```
    start-ssh-agent.cmd
    ```

    You will be prompted for the password of your key. Type it and hit *ENTER*.


=== "mac OS/Linux"

    **Exercise 4A:** start ssh-agent

    Write the output of `ssh-agent` to a file:

    ```
    $ ssh-agent > sshagent.txt
    $ cat sshagent.txt
    ```

    ??? done "Result"
        ```
        SSH_AUTH_SOCK=/tmp/ssh-JGZOTKftGNqM/agent.23764; export SSH_AUTH_SOCK;
        SSH_AGENT_PID=23765; export SSH_AGENT_PID;
        echo Agent pid 23765;
        $
        ```

    **Exercise 4B:** connect to ssh-agent

    Now, you can always connect to `ssh-agent` by typing:

    ```
    $ . sshagent.txt
    ```

    ??? done "Result"
        ```
        Agent pid 23765
        ```

**Exercise 4C:** List identities

We have not added any identities to `ssh-agent` yet:

```
$ ssh-add -l
```

```
The agent has no identities.
$
```


**Exercise 4D:** add a key to ssh-agent

So let's add our private key:

=== "Powershell"
    ``` powershell title="local"
    ssh-add .\.ssh\id_rsa
    ```
=== "mac OS/Linux"
    ``` bash title="local"
    $ ssh-add .ssh/id_rsa
    ```

This will require your passphrase:

```
Enter passphrase for .ssh/id_rsa: ************* *ENTER*
Identity added: .ssh/id_rsa (<user>@laptop)
$
```

**Exercise 4E:** List identities

Now check whether the identity has been added.

```
$ ssh-add -l
```

Your key hash should appear:

```
3072 SHA256:uw6W41Pg5MMLKwASHK1G3JhRe+UOUQyt4NHNp2grVTo <user>@laptop (RSA)
```

**Exercise 4F:** use ssh-agent

Since `ssh-agent` is running and has your private key added to it, you don't have to re-type your password if you want to acces your keys:

```
$ ssh <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch
```

Will result in:

```
    ___ ____  _   _   _     _                         _           _            
|_ _| __ )| | | | | |   (_)_ __  _   ___  __   ___| |_   _ ___| |_ ___ _ __
    | ||  _ \| | | | | |   | | '_ \| | | \ \/ /  / __| | | | / __| __/ _ \ '__|
    | || |_) | |_| | | |___| | | | | |_| |>  <  | (__| | |_| \__ \ ||  __/ |   
|___|____/ \___/  |_____|_|_| |_|\__,_/_/\_\  \___|_|\__,_|___/\__\___|_|   

Last login: Wed Oct 21 18:47:46 2020 from dhcp-99-231.vpn.unibe.ch
[<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
```

**Exercise 4G:** reuse a running ssh-agent from a new terminal

Open a new terminal, and check which identities are known by `ssh-agent`:

```
$ ssh-add -l
```

=== "Powershell"

    Your key hash should appear:

    ```
    3072 SHA256:uw6W41Pg5MMLKwASHK1G3JhRe+UOUQyt4NHNp2grVTo <user>@laptop (RSA)
    ```

    This means that ssh agent will always run in the background, even if you close your terminal, or restart your comptuer. 

=== "Mac OS/Linux"

    The added identities are gone:

    ```
    Could not open a connection to your authentication agent.
    $
    ```


    However, we have stored the information on the ssh-agent. So we can refer back to it:

    ```
    $ . sshagent.txt
    ```

    ??? done "Result"
        ```
        Agent pid 23765
        ```

**Exercise 4H:** use ssh-agent

Now, that we have access to the `ssh-agent`, we can login without the requirement of a passphrase:

```
$ ssh <hpcuser>@binfservms01.unibe.ch
```

??? done "Result"
    ```
        ___ ____  _   _   _     _                         _           _            
    |_ _| __ )| | | | | |   (_)_ __  _   ___  __   ___| |_   _ ___| |_ ___ _ __
        | ||  _ \| | | | | |   | | '_ \| | | \ \/ /  / __| | | | / __| __/ _ \ '__|
        | || |_) | |_| | | |___| | | | | |_| |>  <  | (__| | |_| \__ \ ||  __/ |   
    |___|____/ \___/  |_____|_|_| |_|\__,_/_/\_\  \___|_|\__,_|___/\__\___|_|   

    Last login: Wed Oct 21 18:47:46 2020 from dhcp-99-231.vpn.unibe.ch
    [<hpcuser>@binfservms01 ~]$
    ```
