docs/SLURM_usage/submit_jobs.md, before:

# SLURM job submission

## Introduction

A cluster has many resources and many users. Often the demand for resources is higher than supply. A job scheduler can schedule the jobs submitted by the different users, based on priority, required resources and time. The IBU cluster uses [SLURM](https://slurm.schedmd.com) as job scheduler. After submitting a job to the cluster, SLURM will try to fulfill the job's resource request by allocating resources to the job.

## Resource Allocation

Every job submission starts with a resources allocation (nodes, cores, memory). Allocations are created by most users with the `sbatch` and `srun` commands. Most users will use `sbatch` with or without `srun`.

### sbatch
The `sbatch` command is used to submit a job script for later execution. SLURM options can be part of the submission command, but they are usually in the job script and prefixed by `#SBATCH`.

#### Basic usage
A job submission script start with the options for SLURM prefixed with `#SBATCH`. These are used to manage the resources (e.g. memory) and configure the job environment. All the options for job allocation can be found at [Allocation options](allocation_options.md). The SLURM options are followed by the actual job script.

Here's an example, `first_job.sh`:

```Bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --job-name="first_job"
#SBATCH --time=00:10:00
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=4G

./calc_mat.sh
```

Submit the job script:

```bash
[username@binfservms01 ~]$ sbatch first_job.sh
Submitted batch job 34534
```

Jobs get a job ID that is printed to stdout after job submission. In this case it is 34534. We can use this number to track back our job, e.g. for [status monitoring](SLURM_usage/status_monitoring.md).

#### Parallelization with arrays
In bioinformatics, you will often need to run a similar command with a range of parameters, e.g. running an alignment of multiple files with reads. SLURM makes this easy with the `--array` option. The array option generates a [special variable for SLURM](SLURM_usage/slurm_variables.md), namely `$SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID`. This variable is replaced for each number given to the array.

Basic usage:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --job-name=test_emb_arr
#SBATCH --output=res_emb_arr.txt
#SBATCH --ntasks=1
#SBATCH --time=10:00
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=100
#SBATCH --array=1-8

my_program $SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID
```

This will do a parameter sweep for my_program with the parameters 1 till 8. It generates separate jobs and allocations for each item in the array. Each job will inherit the options given to `sbatch` by the `#SBATCH` prefix.

This concept can become very useful in the combination with UNIX arrays (yes, same name, different thing..). Let's say you have a directory with input files (e.g. sequence reads), and you want run a program on them (e.g. quality control). By generating a UNIX array of the file names and index them based on `$SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID`, you can run it in parallel with only a few lines of code:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#
#SBATCH --job-name=test_emb_arr
#SBATCH --output=res_emb_arr.txt
#SBATCH --ntasks=1
#SBATCH --time=10:00
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=100
#SBATCH --array=0-7

## make a unix array of all files in a directory
FILES=(/path/to/input_data/*)

## run my_program on the ith item in the UNIX array
my_program ${FILES[$SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID]}
```

!!! note "UNIX uses zero indexing"
    Like python and many other languages UNIX uses zero-based indexing, meaning the first item in a list is indicated by a 0, the second by 1 etc. So, in the example above the SLURM array should range from 0-7 if there are 8 files in your input directory.

### srun
The command `srun` submits a job for execution in real time, and takes most of the same options as `sbatch` described at [Allocation options](allocation_options.md). You need `srun` if you want to make use of job steps or parallelization with a Message Passing Interface (MPI). Because it runs in real-time, the terminal will be blocked after calling `srun` untill the job is finished.

Usually `srun` is used within a script submitted with `sbatch` to generate job steps and/or parallelization. In the case `srun` is used within a `sbatch` script, the `sbatch` options are inherited by `srun`. A detailed discussion  on the difference between `sbatch` and `srun` can be found at [stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43767866/slurm-srun-vs-sbatch-and-their-parameters).

#### Generating job steps
Within a script submitted with `sbatch`, `srun` creates job steps.

The script below, `jobsteps.sh`, generates two job steps with `srun`:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

#SBATCH --time=00:10:00
#SBATCH --partition=pall
#SBATCH --job-name=test_slurm

srun hostname
srun sleep 60
```
With default values of `sacct` (more on this at [status monitoring](SLURM_usage/status_monitoring.md)) you can get basic information on job steps. Here you can see which job steps have run, together with their allocated CPUs, status and exit code:

```Bash
[username@binfservms01 ~]$ sbatch jobsteps.sh
Submitted batch job 6200897
[username@binfservms01 ~]$ sacct -j 6200897
       JobID    JobName  Partition    Account  AllocCPUS      State ExitCode
------------ ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- --------
6200897      test_slurm       pall  username          1  COMPLETED      0:0
6200897.bat+      batch             username          1  COMPLETED      0:0
6200897.0      hostname             username          1  COMPLETED      0:0
6200897.1         sleep             username          1  COMPLETED      0:0
```

#### Parallelization of job steps
The command `srun` submits a job in real-time. Because the terminal is blocked, a following step in a job script will have to wait before the previous job step is finished. In the previous example, the `sleep` command could only start after the `hostname` command had finished. It is therefore sequential, just like a regular shell script. However, UNIX comes with functionality to run jobs in the background, which relieves terminal blocking. In this way, you don't have to wait before the previous command has finished. Running jobs in the background is simply done with ending the command with `&`. By putting the first job step in the background, the terminal is unblocked and the next job step can start.

Here's an example:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

#SBATCH --time=00:10:00
#SBATCH --partition=pall
#SBATCH --job-name=test_slurm

srun sleep 60 &
srun hostname &
wait
```

In this example, the `hostname` command will start at the same time as the `sleep` command, and they run in parallel.

!!! note "The `wait` command"
    The command `sbatch` closes the job if the terminal is unblocked. But that's exactly what we're doing with `&`! Therefore we use `wait`. This blocks the terminal until all background processes are finished. Otherwise `sbatch` will close the job before it is finished.


As you remember, `sbatch` options are inherited by `srun`. Therefore without extra options to `srun` overriding it, a job step has access to every CPU allocated to the job created by `sbatch`. All job steps share therefore all job resources. When running job steps in parallel, this is probably not what you want. How multiple job steps divide the allocated resources can be arranged with the option `--ntasks` and `--exclusive`. Using `--ntasks` for `sbatch` defines how many tasks can be allocated at the same time for that job, for `srun` this means the number of tasks per job step. With the option `--exclusive` to `srun` you make sure each task can make full use of the allocated CPU and not share it with other job steps.

!!! danger "Don't use `--exclusive` in combination with `sbatch`"
    Using `--exclusive` with `sbatch` leads to exclusive usage of an entire node. This is almost never necessary, and leads to very high usage of the available resources.

In the below example we generate a job with 4 tasks (`#SBATCH --ntasks=4`). However, the code generates three job steps with different demands, that add up to 7 tasks. By defining the options `--ntasks=n` and `--exclusive` we make sure only four tasks can run at the same time with full usage of the required CPU. The remaining jobs will wait untill the other jobs are finised.

```bash
#!/bin/bash

#SBATCH --time=00:10:00
#SBATCH --ntasks=4
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=4G
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task=1
#SBATCH --partition=pall
#SBATCH --job-name=test_slurm

srun --ntasks=1 --exclusive 1cpu_jobstep.sh &
srun --ntasks=2 --exclusive 2cpu_jobstep.sh &
srun --ntasks=4 --exclusive 4cpu_jobstep.sh &
wait
```

!!! note "When not to use parallel job steps"
    The above works if you have many relatively similar heterogeneous jobs steps. If you have for example one job that is resource intensive but short, and the other is resource limited but takes long, you can probably better submit them as separate jobs using a `sbatch` command for both of them. This is because a single job will keep the same resources allocated for the entire duration. So, the allocated resources will be the resources needed for the resource intensive job step, and will remain allocated during the long non-intensive job step.

#### Interactive jobs

Performing heavy calculations on the home node is not a good practice. However, for debugging, or small/simple steps, you might want to perform relatively heavy jobs interactively. With `srun` you can allocate a job and use bash to interactively call commands within the allocation.

With the script below we allocate resources with 4 CPUs, 4G memory per CPU restricted to a time of 4 hours. With the option `--pty` we say that we want to perform the task in 'pseudo-terminal mode', and the terminal of our choice is bash.

```bash
[username@binfservms01 ~]$ srun --cpus-per-task=4 --mem-per-cpu=4000 --time=04:00:00 --pty bash
srun: job 6200830 queued and waiting for resources
srun: job 6200830 has been allocated resources
[username@binfservas32 ~]$
```

!!! note "Different node"
    Note that the new shell is not at the home node `binfservms01` but at a compute node assigned by SLURM: `binfservas32`

Commit message:

added explanation on job steps

docs/SLURM_usage/submit_jobs.md, after:

# SLURM job submission

## Introduction

A cluster has many resources and many users. Often the demand for resources is higher than supply. A job scheduler can schedule the jobs submitted by the different users, based on priority, required resources and time. The IBU cluster uses [SLURM](https://slurm.schedmd.com) as job scheduler. After submitting a job to the cluster, SLURM will try to fulfill the job's resource request by allocating resources to the job.

## Resource Allocation

Every job submission starts with a resources allocation (nodes, cores, memory). Allocations are created by most users with the `sbatch` and `srun` commands. Most users will use `sbatch` with or without `srun`.

### sbatch
The `sbatch` command is used to submit a job script for later execution. SLURM options can be part of the submission command, but they are usually in the job script and prefixed by `#SBATCH`.

#### Basic usage
A job submission script start with the options for SLURM prefixed with `#SBATCH`. These are used to manage the resources (e.g. memory) and configure the job environment. All the options for job allocation can be found at [Allocation options](allocation_options.md). The SLURM options are followed by the actual job script.

Here's an example, `first_job.sh`:

```Bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --job-name="first_job"
#SBATCH --time=00:10:00
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=4G

./calc_mat.sh
```

Submit the job script:

```bash
[username@binfservms01 ~]$ sbatch first_job.sh
Submitted batch job 34534
```

Jobs get a job ID that is printed to stdout after job submission. In this case it is 34534. We can use this number to track back our job, e.g. for [status monitoring](SLURM_usage/status_monitoring.md).

#### Parallelization with arrays
In bioinformatics, you will often need to run a similar command with a range of parameters, e.g. running an alignment of multiple files with reads. SLURM makes this easy with the `--array` option. The array option generates a [special variable for SLURM](SLURM_usage/slurm_variables.md), namely `$SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID`. This variable is replaced for each number given to the array.

Basic usage:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --job-name=test_emb_arr
#SBATCH --output=res_emb_arr.txt
#SBATCH --ntasks=1
#SBATCH --time=10:00
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=100
#SBATCH --array=1-8

my_program $SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID
```

This will do a parameter sweep for my_program with the parameters 1 till 8. It generates separate jobs and allocations for each item in the array. Each job will inherit the options given to `sbatch` by the `#SBATCH` prefix.

This concept can become very useful in the combination with UNIX arrays (yes, same name, different thing..). Let's say you have a directory with input files (e.g. sequence reads), and you want run a program on them (e.g. quality control). By generating a UNIX array of the file names and index them based on `$SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID`, you can run it in parallel with only a few lines of code:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#
#SBATCH --job-name=test_emb_arr
#SBATCH --output=res_emb_arr.txt
#SBATCH --ntasks=1
#SBATCH --time=10:00
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=100
#SBATCH --array=0-7

## make a unix array of all files in a directory
FILES=(/path/to/input_data/*)

## run my_program on the ith item in the UNIX array
my_program ${FILES[$SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID]}
```

!!! note "UNIX uses zero indexing"
    Like python and many other languages UNIX uses zero-based indexing, meaning the first item in a list is indicated by a 0, the second by 1 etc. So, in the example above the SLURM array should range from 0-7 if there are 8 files in your input directory.

### srun
The command `srun` submits a job for execution in real time, and takes most of the same options as `sbatch` described at [Allocation options](allocation_options.md). You need `srun` if you want to make use of job steps or parallelization with a Message Passing Interface (MPI). Because it runs in real-time, the terminal will be blocked after calling `srun` untill the job is finished.

Usually `srun` is used within a script submitted with `sbatch` to generate job steps and/or parallelization. In the case `srun` is used within a `sbatch` script, the `sbatch` options are inherited by `srun`. A detailed discussion  on the difference between `sbatch` and `srun` can be found at [stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43767866/slurm-srun-vs-sbatch-and-their-parameters).

#### Generating job steps
Within a script submitted with `sbatch`, `srun` creates job steps.

The script below, `jobsteps.sh`, generates two job steps with `srun`:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

#SBATCH --time=00:10:00
#SBATCH --partition=pall
#SBATCH --job-name=test_slurm

srun hostname
srun sleep 60
```
With default values of `sacct` (more on this at [status monitoring](SLURM_usage/status_monitoring.md)) you can get basic information on job steps. Here you can see which job steps have run, together with their allocated CPUs, status and exit code:

```Bash
[username@binfservms01 ~]$ sbatch jobsteps.sh
Submitted batch job 6200897
[username@binfservms01 ~]$ sacct -j 6200897
       JobID    JobName  Partition    Account  AllocCPUS      State ExitCode
------------ ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- --------
6200897      test_slurm       pall  username          1  COMPLETED      0:0
6200897.bat+      batch             username          1  COMPLETED      0:0
6200897.0      hostname             username          1  COMPLETED      0:0
6200897.1         sleep             username          1  COMPLETED      0:0
```

#### Parallelization of job steps
The command `srun` submits a job in real-time. Because the terminal is blocked, a following step in a job script will have to wait before the previous job step is finished. In the previous example, the `sleep` command could only start after the `hostname` command had finished. It is therefore sequential, just like a regular shell script. However, UNIX comes with functionality to run jobs in the background, which relieves terminal blocking. In this way, you don't have to wait before the previous command has finished. Running jobs in the background is simply done with ending the command with `&`. By putting the first job step in the background, the terminal is unblocked and the next job step can start.

Here's an example:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

#SBATCH --time=00:10:00
#SBATCH --partition=pall
#SBATCH --job-name=test_slurm

srun sleep 60 &
srun hostname &
wait
```

In this example, the `hostname` command will start at the same time as the `sleep` command, and they run in parallel. The resources they can use are defined by the options supplied to `sbatch`. The total usage of the parallel job steps will never exceed that.

!!! note "The `wait` command"
    The command `sbatch` closes the job if the terminal is unblocked. But that's exactly what we're doing with `&`! Therefore we use `wait`. This blocks the terminal until all background processes are finished. Otherwise `sbatch` will close the job before it is finished.


As you remember, `sbatch` options are inherited by `srun`. Therefore without extra options to `srun` overriding it, a job step has access to every CPU allocated to the job created by `sbatch`. All job steps share therefore all job resources. When running job steps in parallel, this is probably not what you want. How multiple job steps divide the allocated resources can be arranged with the option `--ntasks` and `--exclusive`. Using `--ntasks` for `sbatch` defines how many tasks can be allocated at the same time for that job, for `srun` this means the number of tasks per job step. With the option `--exclusive` to `srun` you make sure each task can make full use of the allocated CPU and not share it with other job steps.

!!! danger "Don't use `--exclusive` in combination with `sbatch`"
    Using `--exclusive` with `sbatch` leads to exclusive usage of an entire node. This is almost never necessary, and leads to very high usage of the available resources.

In the below example we generate a job with 4 tasks (`#SBATCH --ntasks=4`). However, the code generates three job steps with different demands, that add up to 7 tasks. By defining the options `--ntasks=n` and `--exclusive` we make sure only four tasks can run at the same time with full usage of the required CPU. The remaining jobs will wait untill the other jobs are finised.

```bash
#!/bin/bash

#SBATCH --time=00:10:00
#SBATCH --ntasks=4
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=4G
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task=1
#SBATCH --partition=pall
#SBATCH --job-name=test_slurm

srun --ntasks=1 --exclusive 1cpu_jobstep.sh &
srun --ntasks=2 --exclusive 2cpu_jobstep.sh &
srun --ntasks=4 --exclusive 4cpu_jobstep.sh &
wait
```

!!! note "When not to use parallel job steps"
    The above works if you have many relatively similar heterogeneous jobs steps. If you have for example one job that is resource intensive but short, and the other is resource limited but takes long, you can probably better submit them as separate jobs using a `sbatch` command for both of them. This is because a single job will keep the same resources allocated for the entire duration. So, the allocated resources will be the resources needed for the resource intensive job step, and will remain allocated during the long non-intensive job step.

#### Interactive jobs

Performing heavy calculations on the home node is not a good practice. However, for debugging, or small/simple steps, you might want to perform relatively heavy jobs interactively. With `srun` you can allocate a job and use bash to interactively call commands within the allocation.

With the script below we allocate resources with 4 CPUs, 4G memory per CPU restricted to a time of 4 hours. With the option `--pty` we say that we want to perform the task in 'pseudo-terminal mode', and the terminal of our choice is bash.

```bash
[username@binfservms01 ~]$ srun --cpus-per-task=4 --mem-per-cpu=4000 --time=04:00:00 --pty bash
srun: job 6200830 queued and waiting for resources
srun: job 6200830 has been allocated resources
[username@binfservas32 ~]$
```

!!! note "Different node"
    Note that the new shell is not at the home node `binfservms01` but at a compute node assigned by SLURM: `binfservas32`
